[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>1968 comes to a close,
such a time, a new age,
but the same sad story.
In this time, Thomas
Merton is seen
as a man whose
vision and writing
brings hope to a
world in short supply.
But there are some who say
he is a heretic, while others
accuse him of using religion
to hide from the real world.
Who is he really?
[HOOTING]
The year began
with Merton living
as a hermit in the
Kentucky woods.
It will be the most momentous
year in his remarkable life.
And he begins it with a lively
celebration of the New Year.
[PIANO MUSIC PLAYING]
>>This will be a sort of
a New Year's Eve party,
I guess, from now on.
It's getting-- I'm up late.
It's 7:00 o'clock.
And instead of going
to bed, I'm going
to sit around and
play some records.
So you are invited
to participate
in this New Year's
Eve party of one,
or rather two, me and my
girlfriend, Mary Lou Williams.
But Mary Lou Williams
is on a record.
She is a Kansas City pianist.
I am an addict of
Kansas City jazz.
The closeness takes me back
to days 25, 30 years ago
in Greenwich
Village, when we used
to have a couple of
boogie-woogie pianists
around the corner
from where I lived.
And I used to be down
there almost every night.
And I don't know why I like it.
But I like it.
It makes a great
deal of sense to me.
>>Thomas Merton is
born in France in 1915.
His parents are both artists.
He is an orphan
by the age of 16.
Times of struggle
and search follow,
wine; women; a baby,
maybe; communism, briefly;
Catholicism, intensely; monk.
He enters the Abbey of
Gethsemani in December of 1941.
He is a man in love.
He writes a best
seller about his love.
More books follow,
many more books.
He is acclaimed internationally.
Then, after years of petitioning
his religious superiors,
he is allowed to
live as a hermit.
It's what he's always wanted.
Still, he is a restless
man in a restless time.
[BIRD CRIES]
>>The year struggles with its
own blackness, dark, wet mush
of snow under frozen
rain for two days.
A desolation of wetness
and waste, turning to mud.
[RUMBLING HELICOPTER]
Incredible barbarity
of the Vietnam War,
the weapons used, the ways of
killing utterly defenseless
people.
It is appalling.
Surely the moral
sense of this country
is eroded, except that
there are protests.
How few know even a
little of the facts.
Certainly, this can't go on.
The country is under judgment.
>>Once, his words
were pious, edifying.
Now, they can sting.
Some wonder what's become
of the holy monk they
thought they knew?
You made terribly wild, immoral
statements about our country.
>>You can't prove them
and you know you can't.
>>For a priest to
so engage himself
brands his activity as immoral,
reprehensible, disloyal,
and violating of his
sacred duty and trust.
>>Here is a human being
who is frightened to death
that nuclear energy is going to
cause the end of the world, who
therefore goes around screaming
at the top of his lungs,
stop the war!
For God's sake, stop the war.
>>Do you really want to
be a Christian or not?
Or do you want to be an
abstraction, a Zen mystic?
>>You don't have to
justify your life.
>>Tell me, how can you
justify the isolation
of a hillside hermitage?
>>I get the strong
impression that you
are in some period of crisis.
>>I'm accused of living
in the woods like Thoreau,
instead of living in the desert
like Saint John the Baptist.
All I can answer is that I
am not living like anybody
or unlike anybody.
What I wear is pants.
What I do is live.
How I pray is breathe.
>>Oh, what is a monk to do
in these troubled times?
>>That depends on whom
you ask, of course.
Dom James Fox has definite
ideas of what a monk should do.
As the abbot of Merton's
monastery, he is in control.
Merton's hermitage is less
than a mile from the monastery.
But they are very
different places.
[SINGING]
>>In the monastery, we call
Thomas Merton Father Louis.
Actually, it's
Father Mary Louis.
In our life, you become a
new man and so a new name.
I've been Father Louis'
superior since 1948.
They have been good years.
And he's been a good monk.
I have told more
than one person he
has been the most obedient
monk in the monastery.
Our relationship will
be changing soon.
But as I always say, all
for Jesus through Mary,
with a smile.
>>The abbot is a
very powerful man.
The Church a monk must rely on
his abbot to find God's will.
Merton and Dom James Fox
struggled with this situation.
It is a struggle
with a long history.
[SINGING]
>>Reverend Father, I
fully recognize your right
to refuse permission
for a leave of absence.
In this, you were
following your conscience
and within your rights.
But I wonder about the way in
which you have done everything
possible to prevent me
from obtaining permission
from anyone and in
any way whatsoever.
I do not deny you this right.
But in point of
fact, it seems to me
to represent an arbitrary
and tyrannical spirit.
>>Good Father
Louis, as you know,
is really a genius
at writing books.
He's very dynamic and
bubbling over with energy.
And he has a very
expansive imagination.
To me, the whole
problem is that God
has one plan of life
for Father Louis.
And good Father Louis
is trying to follow
another one, different from
what God has planned for him.
The result is, of course,
terrific conflict.
[SINGING]
>>Do you not tend to assume
that your policies represent
the last word in the spiritual
perfection of every one
of your subjects and that anyone
who is drawn to another way
is leaving the
path of perfection,
simply because he is not
following your ideas?
>>As yet, of course, Father is
so obsessed with his own plan
that he cannot quite
see or, at least,
is not yet quite docile
enough to accept God's will.
But I think in the end
this spirit of faith
and increased spirit of
obedience and humility
will finally triumph.
[SINGING]
>>I have always
striven to be perfectly
obedient to legitimate commands.
But I beg the right to form
my conscience without demands
that I follow your
direction and no other.
I hope you understand
this rightly,
as a humble and filial petition.
>>My how they played each other.
And still the good
abbot trusted Merton
to instruct and help form the
novice monks of Gethsemani.
It is one of the most important
jobs in the monastery.
>>In our community, he is
the master of students.
He's very well liked by
every one of the students.
They look upon him as an
oracle of spirituality
and lean heavily upon
him for their guidance
in the spiritual life.
If he were ever
to leave here, it
would be a source of great
scandal to our young monks
and would betray
them to the spirit
of instability and change.
[SINGING]
>>Reverend Father,
I propose to you
that I should spend
a period of time
in Japan, at one
of our monasteries,
in such a way as to be able
to visit some Zen monasteries
and meet those
interested in Zen.
This project would be most
important, not only for me
personally, but also
for the community here,
and indeed for the whole Church.
[BELLS TOLLING]
>>Concerning his relations
with the outside world,
both Catholic and
non-Catholic, good Father Louis
does not realize that
he is a public figure
of tremendous importance.
In my travels, I hear comments
on how much confidence priests
and religious place in
Father Louis and his writing.
Here again, there would be
tremendous scandal for them
to know that he is really quite
restless and unsure of himself.
His influence as
a writer would be
destroyed in a marked degree.
Father Louis wrote to
a respected theologian
for his opinion.
And he wrote back,
Father, I think
that God's will rivets
you to Gethsemani as he
was riveted to this cross.
Father, I do not think
that under any condition
you can leave Gethsemani.
You are wedded to it until
death, for better or for worse.
[SINGING]
>>I am both a prisoner
and an escaped prisoner.
>>Round and round, they go.
For 20 years, two gifted men
doing what they believe they
are called to do.
Then, in early 1968,
Dom James retirees
to a hermitage of his own.
[BIRD CRIES]
Now, the new abbot is
a very different man.
Flavian Burns is 36 years old.
He has been Merton's student.
He admires Merton.
So many of the young
monks admire him.
For some, Merton is the reason
they entered the monastic life.
Abbott Flavian is open
to Merton's request
to attend some conferences
away from the monastery
or seek even greater solitude
in a more remote hermitage.
Everywhere, everything
seems to be changing.
[MUSIC AND SINGING]
>>1968 is a beast of a year.
Are things happening because
people in desperation
want them to happen or
do they have to happen?
Is the human race
self-destructive?
Is the Christian message
of love a pitiful delusion?
Or most one just love
in impossible situation?
And what sense can
possibly be made
by an authoritarian
church, that comes out
a hundred years late with
its official pronouncements?
>>Merton continues to
receive many invitations.
One is to a conference
in Bangkok, Thailand,
including Christian
and Buddhist monks.
It is very tempting.
>>It looks as though Father
Flavian will approve my going
to Bangkok, as
well as Indonesia,
if Thailand doesn't
get into complete wars.
I'm afraid it will.
In any case, I'm planning
on Indonesia and scarcely
believe it possible, hoping
also for Japan and some Zen
monastery.
>>You know, certainly
by 1968, Merton
is still highly committed
to social justice issues.
But his emphasis is changing.
His turn towards other
faiths and, once again,
to more emphasis
on contemplation,
I think is trying to restore
the balance that he was always
seeking between
contemplation and action.
>>Well it's true that as
Merton set off for Asia,
he said that he had
questions, not answers.
>>He wanted to go and
hear about Buddhism
directly from the teachers of
it, instead of through books.
And this was just another
step in his search
to really go deeper.
>>Merton's journey
to Asia is, I think,
a culmination of many things.
He's a seeker.
He is, in a sense, a pioneer.
>>He knew so much about it.
He had read about it.
He had corresponded with
people who were Asian experts
and people in Asia.
But he wanted to taste it.
He wanted to sense it.
Merton was a very
sensory-driven person.
>>You know, it's interesting.
Tom never had any boxes.
He never put himself in any box.
Well, I'm just
interested in jazz
or I'm just interested in this.
I mean he was expanding.
He just expanded all the time.
>>You know what characterizes
a truly holy person is
what I call beginner's mind.
Others call it that
too, of course.
This recognition
that you're always
starting, that you
don't know anything yet.
>>And he understood that there's
doctrine, ideology, on the one
hand, and experience and
what he called realization
on the other.
And whereas the doctrines
of Catholicism and Buddhism
might not be such a
great fit, the experience
of advanced seekers
could be identical.
>>So many Catholics,
for example,
were very disappointed that
Merton went to the East,
as if he'd lost his
Christian faith.
>>When most of the
Church was saying
those are no better than
pagans, who are these people
worshipping, whatever they do,
the Buddha, and all that stuff,
Merton really saw
that parallel track
of their spirituality and his.
>>Merton was this
curious mix of someone
who could rebel against Church
authority, needle Church
authority, question
Church authority,
appreciate and explore
and communicate
with other religions, and
remain totally Catholic.
>>It's about seeking
God in kind of things.
It begins with the intuition
that God is already there
in the world and
in other persons.
I mean the alternative for
Merton would be unacceptable.
That somehow God is not
in other human beings
in 2/3 of humanity.
>>At one point, he says,
well, how can I reconcile
and how can the Church
reconcile the East and the West?
And he says, I will
reconcile them in myself.
>>There's when they talk
about the explorer's journey
or the hero's journey
as inherently selfish.
You are-- you are going off to
figure out more about yourself.
But it doesn't necessarily serve
society or the greater whole
unless "you come back
with the treasure
and share it with the world."
And I think there were those
who would argue that Merton did
share his treasure with the
world through his journals
and through his writings.
>>The Zen phrase
is Big Sky Mind.
Well, he had Big Sky Mind.
He's as open as the sky.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>On October 14,
1968, Thomas Merton
leaves San Francisco, heading
west, to land in the East.
>>I'm over a wing and see
only a lovely distant garden
of delicate Pacific clouds, like
coral, like rich and delicately
formed, full white
and pink flowers.
The utter happiness of
life in a plane, quiet,
time to read, but long,
long, endless noon.
Calcutta, smiling, fecal,
detached, tired, inexhaustible,
young, old, full of young
people who seem old.
It is the unmasked city.
It is the subculture of
poverty and overpopulation.
[LOUD CITY NOISES]
People, people, people,
campfires in the streets
and squares; movie posters,
those Asian posters
with the strange, enormous
faces of violent or demented
Western gods.
The enormous gunners surrounded
by impossible writings.
One has John Wayne
with eight arms.
Well, he certainly has
enough guns already.
Or the dance of
Shiva with Sinatra.
The situation of
the tourist becomes
ludicrous and impossible
in a place like Calcutta.
How does one take
pictures of these streets
and the faces, the
eyes of such people?
And the cows, roaming among
them on the sidewalks,
and buzzards by the scores,
circling over the main streets
in the best section.
Yet, the people are beautiful.
But the routine of the
beggars is heart-rending.
The little girl who
suddenly appeared
at the window of my taxi, the
utterly lovely smile with which
stretched out her hand.
And then the
extinguishing of the light
when she drew it back empty.
I had no Indian money yet.
She fell away from the
taxi, as if she were
sinking in water and drowning.
And I wanted to die.
I couldn't get her
out of my mind.
Yet, when you give
money to one, a dozen
have killed themselves
running after your cab.
Sure, there is a well-practiced
routine, an art, a theater,
but a starkly necessary art
of dramatizing one's despair
and awful emptiness.
Then there was the
woman who followed me
three blocks, sweeping,
murmuring something
like, daddy, daddy,
I'm very poor.
Until I finally
gave her a rupee.
OK, there is theater here too.
But she is very poor.
And I have come from
the West, a rich daddy.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>Merton attends a conference
call "The First Spiritual
Summit."
The theme is "The Relevance of
Religion in the Modern World."
Leading figures from the
world's major religions attend.
A young student, named Arthur
Schriberg, was also invited.
>>One of the great highlights
of my life was in 1968.
When I was an intern at a
place called International
House in New York City, the
president came up to me one day
and said, how would
you like to go
to Calcutta, India, representing
the youth of America,
to a place called the
Temple of Understanding?
You're going to meet with
leaders of various religions
in the world.
And I remember saying,
would you say that again?
So the next thing I know,
I'm on the plane heading off
to Calcutta.
I was just a curious kid.
>>The curious kid finds
himself interacting
with distinguished
spiritual thinkers,
from a range of traditions.
Even in this company,
Merton makes an impression.
>>I was struck
with his humanness.
But he was not
physically imposing.
He spoke neither
softly, nor loud.
He didn't speak a lot.
He wanted others to talk more.
He asked me sort of my story.
I remember because I--
god, I want to the talk.
But he kept asking me questions.
And he said, like, I don't get
around young people very often.
I've read his poetry, and a
prolific writer and thinker.
I didn't know he had listening
skills, particularly.
That wasn't what
I was expecting.
Because he was pretty informal,
again, in a setting where
some folks were very formal.
>>The attendees
presented papers,
thoughtful, prayerful,
insightful, in-depth.
But in more informal
remarks, Merton
offered a sense of a monk,
what a monk is or could be,
and how that relates
to the rest the world.
>>The question that people have
been asking to a great extent,
who do you represent?
What religion do you represent?
And that is a rather
difficult question to answer.
I came with the notion
of perhaps saying
something for monks and to monks
of all religions, because I'm
supposed to be a monk.
And therefore
speaking for monks,
I am really speaking
for a very strange kind
of person, a marginal person.
He does not belong
to an establishment.
He is a marginal person
who withdraws deliberately
to the margin of society,
with a view of deepening
fundamental human experience.
Consequently, as one of
these strange people,
I speak to you as
a representative
of all marginal persons who
have done this kind of thing
deliberately.
The office of the monk,
or the marginal people,
or the meditative
person, or the poet,
is to go beyond death,
even in this life.
To go beyond the dichotomy
of life and death,
and therefore be
a witness to life.
This requires, of course, faith.
But soon as you
say faith in terms
of this monastic and
marginal existence,
you run into another problem.
Faith means doubt.
Faith is not the
suppression of doubt.
It is the overcoming of doubt.
And you overcome doubt
by going through it.
A man of faith, who has
never experienced doubt,
is not a man of faith.
Consequently, the
monk is one who
has to struggle in the
depths of his being
with the presence
of doubt and to go
through what some religions
call the Great Doubt.
I stand among you as one who a
offers a small message of hope,
that first there
are always people
who dare to seek on the
margin of society, who are not
dependent on social
acceptance, not
routines, and prefer
a kind of free-floating
existence under a state a risk.
And among these people,
if they are faithful
to their own calling, and
faithful to their own vocation,
and faithful to their
own message from God,
communication on the
deepest level is possible.
And the deepest level
of communication
is not communication,
but communion.
It is wordless.
It is beyond words.
And it is beyond speech.
And it is beyond concept.
Not that we discover
a new unity.
We discover an older unity.
My dear brothers and
sisters, we are already one.
But we imagine that we are not.
And what we have to recover
is our original unity.
What we have to
be is what we are.
Oh, God.
You have taught us that
if we are open to another,
you dwell in us.
Let us be bound
together with love
as we go our diverse ways,
united in this one spirit,
which makes you
present in the world.
Love has overcome.
Love is victorious.
>>I'd say amen.
Yeah, that was a Merton.
I mean-- and that
was the spirit that
lay over the entire conference.
And if only it would happen.
We did have this sense we're
going to change the world.
And I went home.
The world didn't change much.
But--you know,
[MUSIC AND SINGING]
>>Another young American
named Harold Talbott
agrees to help Merton meet
Tibetan Buddhist teachers.
10 years earlier, Harold
had become a Catholic
because of Merton's writing.
Now, he is in Asia, studying
with the Dalai Lama.
He arranges an
audience for Merton.
>>I was living in a bungalow.
And I gave my room
and study to Merton.
And I bedded down on
sort of a wooden sofa.
Merton had the most
colossal cold and was sick.
He burned the candle at both
ends to a frightening degree.
The light would go
on at 2:00 o'clock
and he would do this prayers.
And then, I would the light
go in the study at 4:00
in the morning.
>>I am not exactly
dizzy with the idea
of looking for a magic master.
But I would certainly like to
learn something by experience.
And it does seem that
the Tibetan Buddhists are
the only ones who, at present,
have a really large number
of people who have attained
to extraordinary heights
in meditation and contemplation.
This does not excludes Zen.
But I do feel very much
at home with the Tibetans,
even though much that appears in
books about them seems bizarre,
if not sinister.
Harold Talbott
says the Dalai Lama
has to see a lot of
blue-haired ladies in pants;
and people looking
for a freak religion;
and rich people, who
have nothing better
to do than come up
here out of curiosity.
His Western visitors
are well screened.
>>Harold first met Merton at
Gethsemani 10 years earlier.
The man he sees in
Asia seems different.
>>Merton saw himself
as a man who had
to purify himself of something.
It was a very heavy
load to carry.
But by the time
he came to India,
it turns out that he
had lived his life.
And this was the Mozart finale.
And he was in a state of
utmost exuberance, engaged,
and absorbing, and
eating with delectation
every moment of every experience
and every person that passed.
He tipped Sikh taxi drivers
like a Proustian millionaire.
He was on a roll.
He was on a toot, on
a holiday from school.
He was the grand
senor, the great lord
of the spiritual life.
>>The first meeting
with His Holiness
was used to get to
know each other.
Merton was authentic, no
gestures, no artifice,
no manner, no program, no
come on, just here I am folks.
And folks happened
to be the Dalai Lama.
And they encountered.
And appropriately enough,
there was utter silence.
And then the Dalai Lama
challenged him, or greeted him,
by saying, what do you want?
[CHANTING]
>>The Dalai Lama is most
impressive as a person.
He's strong and alert,
bigger than I expected.
For some reason,
I thought he would
be small, a very solid,
energetic, generous,
and warm person.
>>And Merton had 30
years behind him.
And when he walked into a
room or the cell of meditator,
or a monk, or a lama, he was
greeted with a recognition.
I've never seen a Western person
received by a lama the way
he was received.
The Dalai Lama wanted
to learn from Merton
about his spiritual life and
how monks lived in the West.
[BELL CLANGING]
>>There were so much good humor,
and so much laughter, and so
much camaraderie, and so much
confidence of understanding.
>>It was a very warm
and cordial discussion.
And at the end, I felt we
had become very good friends
and were somehow quite
close to one another.
I feel a great respect and
fondness for him as a person.
And believe, too, that there
is a spiritual bond between us.
He remarked that
I was a Catholic
Geshe, which, Harold said, was
the highest possible praise.
[BELL CHIMING]
>>Merton had a highly
playful manner.
He was lots of fun
to travel with.
But that being said, what made
him happiest was to be alone.
He loved his camera.
He was a fantastic photographer.
He radiated a sense of,
this is an adventure.
Here I am folks.
And he woke people up,
and illuminated them,
and enchanted them, and gave
them a tremendous happiness
and a good laugh.
But also, there was always
a communication from him
that he was a representative
of the religious life,
whether he was wearing a
windbreaker or a habit.
The Indian people greeted
him as a pilgrim, a seeker.
And that was the basis on
which he was met by everybody
and congratulated valiantly,
whether they recognized
his public identity or not.
People knew his
spiritual quality.
People in Plains knew it.
There was no question about it.
Merton was not an object of
scrutiny, he was an event.
>>As Merton travels, he is
writing, always writing.
Some entries are thoughtful,
some simply observations
of a journey.
>>Down in the valley, a
bird sings, a boy whistles,
the white butterfly zigzags
across the top left corner
of the view.
Johnson has stopped the bombing.
Two magpies are
fighting in a tree.
Early this morning in a
hotel, a man next door
was coughing and
vomiting, violently.
Next, he was chanting
loudly in Hindu,
with an occasional cough,
that got louder and louder.
The police today
claimed to have arrested
a notorious shoe-lifter.
The alleged accused operated
throughout the city,
lifting shoes from shrines,
while devotees were at prayer.
Today, I wrote to Dom James, Dom
Flavian, Lawrence Ferlinghetti,
and the queen of Bhutan.
The sun in Calcutta.
Are you worried?
Refresh yourself with cigars.
This morning I made a partial
purification of the luggage.
What will I do with all books
that need to be thrown out?
Innocence,
experience, innocence.
[MUSIC]
It is hardly like any December
or advent I have ever known.
I visited Polonnaruwa on Monday.
Polonnaruwa, with its
vast area under trees,
fences, few people, no
beggars, a dirt road, lost.
Then the silence of the
extraordinary faces.
[CLICKING]
[BIRD CRIES]
Looking at these
figures, I'm suddenly,
almost forcibly,
jerked clean out
of the habitual half-tied
vision of things.
And an inner clearness,
clarity, as if
exploding from the
rocks themselves,
became evident and obvious.
Everything is emptiness.
And everything is compassion.
I don't know when
in my life I have
had such a sense of beauty
and spiritual validity running
together in one
aesthetic illumination.
Surely, my Asian
pilgrimage has become clear
and purified itself.
I mean I know and have seen what
I was obscurely looking for.
I don't know what else remains.
But I have now seen and have
pierced through the surface
and have got beyond the
shadow and the disguise.
This is Asia in its purity,
not covered with garbage.
And it is clear, pure, complete.
It says everything.
It needs nothing.
For the doctrinaire,
the mind that
needs well-established
positions,
such peace, such silence,
can be frightening.
>>There's this culture
of the polynirvana,
the Buddha ready to die.
You see an image
of great repose.
It's a massive work.
And one feels the silence in
repose of this massive work.
>>He didn't want to just
intellectually understand God.
He wanted to feel it.
He wanted to know
you are right here.
You are right there with me.
I am talking to you.
I feel your presence.
That's what happened
at Polonnaruwa.
He felt the presence of God.
>>Almost all cultures
have had mystics.
They're the amplifiers of
the voice of God, which
is paradoxical often silent.
God is just as real, in
fact more real, to a mystic,
than you and I
facing each other.
They're most acutely aware
of the mystery of what
it means to be human being.
>>And when one takes that in,
with eyes, and mind, and heart,
it is enormously impressive.
>>You know, it was this flash.
This awareness.
>>It was a moment of kind of
boundary-less free-fall, just
boundary-less free-fall.
>>So for Merton, I
think he had several
of these transformational
experiences.
And I think in some
sense, he brings
all of that to Polonnaruwa.
>>When Catholics
look at Polonnaruwa,
they might say,
oh, that was pagan.
That's a pagan place.
But for Merton, it
wasn't that way.
Because he really understood,
as the Dalai Lama said
when I interviewed him
in India, all good paths
lead to the same place.
This is God up here.
The Buddhist finds
it in his way.
The Muslim finds it in her way.
We Catholics find it in our way.
But it's that point,
that point, that we all
seek to be closer to God.
So I don't think we need
to be threatened at all.
In fact, we are enriched
by another tradition
that could bring a mystic like
Merton so close to his God.
>>Rumi wrote that the
voice of God is silence.
Everything else is
poor translation.
[MUSIC AND SINGING]
>>My next stop will be the
Bangkok meeting, to which I
do not especially look forward.
Then Indonesia, a whole
new journey begins there.
And I am still not sure
where it will take me
or what I can or should plan.
Certainly, I am sick
of hotels and planes.
But the journey has only begun.
Some of the places
I really wanted
to see from the beginning
have not been touched.
>>So I will conclude
on that note.
I believe the plan is to
have all the questions
for this morning's conferences
this evening at the panel.
So I will disappear from view.
And we can all have
a Coke or something.
Thank you very much.
[APPLAUSE]
[MUSIC AND SINGING]
>>Thomas Merton always
could make an exit.
He returned to his room and
took a nap, then a shower.
There's a wet floor, a fan
with bad wiring, 220 volts.
The official
explanation is death
by accidental electrocution.
Oh, there are other theories.
A CIA hit job, suicide,
most anything is possible.
But the official explanation
makes the most sense.
But how to make sense
of this remarkable life?
>>For a short inventory of
effects, estate of Thomas James
Merton.
20 rows of Kodak
film value, $20.
One olive-colored Dacron
summer suit, value $4.
>>He wrote a letter to
the monks at Gethsemani
just before he died.
And he said, the more I get
to know my Buddhist brothers
and sisters, the more I
appreciate my faith in Christ
may live in the
heart of all of us.
And then at the
same time, he could
stand just before he died
and lead a prayer, and say,
my brothers and sisters,
we are already one.
We only imagine
we are different.
>>16 pairs of socks, value nil.
One black felt beret, value nil.
>>Merton was what we
would call a seer.
He saw at a higher level.
But particularly
in the rediscovery
of the contemplative
tradition, he almost
reintroduced the word.
>>Nine neckties, value nil.
One neck brace and
straps, value nil.
Six pamphlets on
Buddhism, value nil.
>>One Timex watch, value $10.
Two Cistercian
breviaries, value nil.
One rosary, broken, value nil.
Small icon of Virgin
and Child, value nil.
>>When I told my pastor of the
church I was at in Cleveland
that Merton had died,
he says, well, maybe God
took him so he couldn't
do any more harm.
>>One Pan-American Airlines
ticket, unused portion,
Bangkok, Djakarta, Hong Kong,
Taipei, Tokyo, Hakodate, Tokyo,
Honolulu, San Francisco,
Albuquerque, Chicago,
Louisville, value of $844.90.
>>So it took about
a week for the body
to come back from Asia.
It was like really getting heavy
waiting for that to happen.
>>It was like this gray
coffin, which was thrust up
from the Orient, and,
like a gray whale,
beached on the front of our
sanctuary, the sign of Jonah,
right there, staring
us in the face.
And Jonah was inside.
>>I realized a strange
coincidence, rather personal.
It was December
10th, my birthday,
when Father Louis entered
Gethsemani in 1941.
And now, it was
December 10, 1968,
again on my birthday,
when he entered eternity.
[BELLS TOLLING]
>>What was the final
result of the life?
Jesus said it more
succinctly, by their fruits
you will know them.
What did his life lead to and
what has it done for people?
>>No mystic would say,
I'm looking for God
to better the world.
That's not their goal.
And yet what happens is
they do better the world.
>>He was able to show in
his writing and record
in a permanently attractive
way, a often brilliant way,
the life of search, the
life of spiritual search.
So he sets an example
of spiritual search
that is completely contagious.
Jews, Christians, Muslims,
we all listen to him, Hindus.
He's a wonderful source as an
example of the life of search.
>>I think once in a
lifetime come these people,
like comets, who try to
draw the perfect circle.
And they draw you to them.
>>So Merton has held, some
50 years after his death.
He is still being widely
read, regularly published.
I think at this point, if I'm
not mistaken, more of his books
have come out after
his death than before,
which is astonishing.
>>I think as long
as people are lost,
the wise ones are relevant.
And I count him along the ways.
Yeah.
I think he's more relevant.
Sure, some of the things get
dated, some of his references.
But truth is truth.
And this was a man who,
despite his human failings,
spoke the truth.
[PIANO MUSIC PLAYING]
>>I think there is
a certain romance
in dying young and letting sort
of your enduring public finish
your story.
That what Merton
would have done,
what Merton would have said,
is what sort of the Merton
followers talk about.
What would have happened in
1969 if Merton had been around?
What would he have added
to the conversation?
It is all very rich and
wonderful to think about.
In many ways, it might
be richer and more
wonderful to think
about than what he
would have actually produced.
I don't know.
Because he would have
come back in a atmosphere
that would have
wanted to silence him.
And how would he would
have dealt with that?
>>He had a way of
saying something.
And he's say, you see.
And so on, and so on,
and then, you see.
So he was kind of always
giving you the picture.
He was trying to get
your mind to awaken
to what he was talking about.
It was kind of a quirk.
But I think that the
quirk says something
about what he was trying
to achieve in his teaching,
you see, you get it.
>>He would be hip at 95.
So it wouldn't matter.
Because he's always thinking.
He's always coming
up with new ideas.
Like I said, he was expansive.
So those kind of people
just never get old.
>>Merton is one of these
Renaissance people.
And he's a multi-layered,
multi-faceted person.
And therefore, the social
justice person, the poet,
the literary person, the
devout Catholic, the Buddhist,
the Hindu, the
person who identifies
with more than one tradition
at once, the person who
prophetically pulls the cover on
hypocrisy, everyone sees that.
It's like touching the
elephant and naming--
the blind people
touching different parts
of the elephant.
And people touch
the part of Merton
that they see they
most relate to.
But the thing is you--
like pieces in a mosaic,
you step back.
And you see that really, he was
a kind of a synchronized unity
of all those things.
And that unity of all
those things is Merton.
>>You see, one person
make effort good.
But 10 person, better.
So now time come-- come forward.
Do something.